Add Rooms and Portals docs (#5111)
godotengine/godot-docs: tutorials/3d/portals/fundamentals.rst

> Fundamentals
> ============
> The RoomManager
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
> Anytime you want to use the portal system, you need to include a special node in your scene tree, called the :ref:`RoomManager<class_RoomManager>`. The RoomManager is responsible for the runtime maintenance of the system, especially converting the objects in your rooms into a `room graph` which is used at runtime to perform occlusion culling and other tasks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fundamentals
============

The RoomManager
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Anytime you want to use the portal system, you need to include a special node in your scene tree, called the :ref:`RoomManager<class_RoomManager>`. The RoomManager is responsible for the runtime maintenance of the system, especially converting the objects in your rooms into a *room graph* which is used at runtime to perform occlusion culling and other tasks.
```

> Room Conversion
> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
> This conversion must take place every time you want to activate the system, it does not store the `room graph` in your project (for flexibility and to save memory). You can either trigger it by pressing the ``Convert Rooms`` button in the editor toolbar when the RoomManager is selected, or you can call the ``rooms_convert`` function in the RoomManager. This latter method will be what you use in game. Note that for safety, best practice is to call ``rooms_clear`` before unloading / changing levels.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Room conversion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This conversion must take place every time you want to activate the system, it does not store the *room graph* in your project (for flexibility and to save memory). You can either trigger it by pressing the **Convert Rooms** button in the editor toolbar when the RoomManager is selected, or you can call the ``rooms_convert()`` method in the RoomManager. This latter method will be what you use in-game. Note that for safety, best practice is to call ``rooms_clear()`` before unloading or changing levels.
```

> If you convert the level while the editor is running, the portal culling system will take over from the normal Godot frustum culling. This may affect some editor features. For this reason, you can turn the portal culling on and off, using the ``Active`` setting in the RoomManager.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you convert the level while the editor is running, the portal culling system will take over from the normal Godot frustum culling. This may affect some editor features. For this reason, you can turn the portal culling on and off, using the **Active** property in the RoomManager node.
```

> .. note:: In order use the RoomManager you have to tell it where the rooms are in your scene tree, or rather where the ``RoomList`` node is, that is, the parent of your rooms - see below. If the RoomList is not set, conversion will fail, and you will see a warning dialog box.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. note:: To use the RoomManager, you have to tell it where the rooms are in your scene tree, or rather where the RoomList node is. This RoomList is the parent of your rooms - see below. If the RoomList is not set, conversion will fail, and you will see a warning dialog box.
```

.. image:: img/room_manager.png

> Rooms
> ~~~~~
> What is a room?
> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
> :ref:`Room<class_Room>`\ s are a way of spatially partitioning your level into areas that make sense in terms of the level design. Rooms often quite literally *are* rooms (for instance in a building). Ultimately though, as far as the engine is concerned, a room respresents a **non-overlapping** convex volume, in which you would typically place most of your objects that fall within that area.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rooms
~~~~~

What is a room?
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

:ref:`Room<class_Room>`\ s are a way of spatially partitioning your level into areas that make sense in terms of the level design. Rooms often quite literally *are* rooms (for instance in a building). Ultimately though, as far as the engine is concerned, a room respresents a **non-overlapping** convex volume, in which you would typically place most of your objects that fall within that area.
```

> A room doesn't need to correspond to a literal room. It could for example also be a canyon in an outdoor area, or a smaller part of a concave room. With a little imagination you can use the system in almost any scenario.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A room doesn't need to correspond to a literal room. It could for example also be a canyon in an outdoor area, or a smaller part of a concave room. With a little imagination, you can use the system in almost any scenario.
```

> Why convex?
> ^^^^^^^^^^^
> The reason why rooms are defined as convex volumes (or 'convex hulls' as they are known), is that mathematically it is very easy to determine whether a point is within a convex hull. A simple plane check will tell you the distance of a point from a plane. If a point is behind all the planes bounding the convex hull, then by definition, it is inside the room. This makes all kinds of things easier in the internals of the system, such as checking which room a camera is within.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Why convex?
^^^^^^^^^^^

The reason why rooms are defined as convex volumes (or *convex hulls* as they are known), is that mathematically, it is easy to determine whether a point is within a convex hull. A simple plane check will tell you the distance of a point from a plane. If a point is behind all the planes bounding the convex hull, then by definition, it is inside the room. This makes all kinds of things easier in the internals of the system, such as checking which room a camera is within.
```

*A convex hull. The hull is defined as a series of planes facing outward. If a point is behind all the planes, it is within the hull.*

.. image:: img/convex_hull.png

> Why non-overlapping?
> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
> If two rooms overlap, and a camera or player is in this overlapping zone, then there is no way to tell which room the object should be in - and hence render from, or be rendered in. This requirement for non-overlapping rooms does have implications for level design.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Why non-overlapping?
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If two rooms overlap, and a camera or player is in this overlapping zone, then there is no way to tell which room the object should be in (and hence render from), or be rendered in. This requirement for non-overlapping rooms has some implications for level design.
```

If you accidentally create overlapping rooms, the editor will flag a warning when you convert the rooms, and indicate any overlapping zones in red.

.. image:: img/room_overlap.png

> The system does attempt to cope with overlapping rooms as best as possible by making the current room *'sticky'*. That is, each object remembers which room it was in last frame, and stays within it as long as it does not move outside the convex hull room bound. This can result in some hysteresis in these overlapping zones.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The system does attempt to cope with overlapping rooms as best as possible by making the current room as *"sticky"*. Each object remembers which room it was in last frame, and stays within it as long as it does not move outside the convex hull room bound. This can result in some hysteresis in these overlapping zones.
```

> There is one exception however - *internal rooms* (*they are described later, you do not have to worry about these to start with*).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is one exception however for *internal rooms*. (These internal rooms are described later, you do not have to worry about these to start with.)
```

> How do I create a room?
> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
> A :ref:`Room<class_Room>` is a node type that can be added to the scene tree like any other. You can place objects within the room by making them children and grand-children of the Room node. Instead of placing the rooms as children of a scene root node, you will need to create a Spatial especially for the job of being the parent of all the rooms. This node we will refer to as the ``RoomList``. You will need to assign the roomlist node in the RoomManager, so the RoomManager knows where to find the rooms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
How do I create a room?
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A :ref:`Room<class_Room>` is a node type that can be added to the scene tree like any other. You can place objects within the room by making them children and grand-children of the Room node. Instead of placing the rooms as children of a scene root node, you will need to create a Spatial especially for the job of being the parent of all the rooms. This node we will refer to as the ``RoomList``. You will need to assign the roomlist node in the RoomManager, so the RoomManager knows where to find the rooms.
```

> Room naming convention
> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
> Unlike most nodes in Godot, a specific naming convention should be followed in order to identify each room. The name should have the prefix ``Room_`` followed by the name you wish to give the room, e.g. ``Room_kitchen``, ``Room_lounge``. If you don't follow these naming guidelines, the system will warn you and may not work correctly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Room naming convention
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Unlike most nodes in Godot, a specific naming convention should be followed in order to identify each room. The name should have the prefix ``Room_`` followed by the name you wish to give the room, e.g. ``Room_kitchen``, ``Room_lounge``. If you don't follow these naming guidelines, the system will warn you and will not work correctly.
```

> How do I define the shape and position of my room convex hull?
> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
> Because defining the room bound is the most important aspect of the system, there are THREE methods available to define the shape of a room in Godot:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
How do I define the shape and position of my room convex hull?
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Because defining the room bound is the most important aspect of the system, there are 3 methods available to define the shape of a room in Godot:
```

> 1. Use the geometry of the objects contained within the room to automatically create an approximate bound
> 2. Provide a manual bound - a MeshInstance in the room that has geometry in the shape of the desired bound, with a name prefixed by ``Bound_``. This is something you might choose to do if you create your levels in Blender or similar (see :ref:`doc_rooms_and_portals_blender`).
> 3. By manually editing the points that define the convex hull, in the room inspector.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Use the geometry of the objects contained within the room to automatically create an approximate bound.
2. Provide a manual bound. This is a MeshInstance in the room that has geometry in the shape of the desired bound, with a name prefixed by ``Bound_``. This is something you might choose to do if you create your levels in Blender or similar (see :ref:`doc_rooms_and_portals_blender`).
3. By manually editing the points that define the convex hull, in the room inspector.
```

While the first option can be all that is required, particularly with simple rooms, or for pre-production, the power of the manual bounds gives you ultimate control (at the expense of a small amount of editing). You can also combine the two approaches, perhaps using automatic bounds for most rooms but manually editing problem areas.

The automatic method is used whenever a manual bound is not supplied.

*A simple pair of rooms. The portal margin is shown with translucent red, and the room hulls are shown with green wireframe.*

.. image:: img/simple_room.png

> Portals
> ~~~~~~~
> If you create some rooms, place objects within them, then convert the level in the editor, you will see the objects in the rooms appearing and showing as you move between rooms. There is one problem however! Although you can see the objects within the room that the camera is in, you can't see to any neighbouring rooms! For that we need portals.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Portals
~~~~~~~

If you create some rooms, place objects within them, then convert the level in the editor, you will see the objects in the rooms appearing and showing as you move between rooms. There is one problem however. Although you can see the objects within the room that the camera is in, you can't see to any neighbouring rooms! For that, we need portals.
```

> :ref:`Portal<class_Portal>`\ s are special convex polygons. You position over the openings between rooms, in order to allow the system to see between them. You can create a portal node directly in the editor. The default portal has 4 points and behaves much like a ``plane`` :ref:`MeshInstance<class_MeshInstance>`. You can add or remove points using the inspector. A portal will require at least 3 points to work (in order to form a polygon rather than a point or line).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:ref:`Portal<class_Portal>`\ s are special convex polygons. You position over the openings between rooms, in order to allow the system to see between them. You can create a portal node directly in the editor. The default portal has 4 points and behaves much like a ``plane`` :ref:`MeshInstance<class_MeshInstance>`. You can add or remove points using the inspector. A portal will require at least 3 points to work - this is because it needs to form a polygon rather than a point or line.
```

> Portals only need to be placed in one of each pair of neighbouring rooms (the *'source room'*) - the system will automatically make them two way unless you choose otherwise in the portal settings. The portal normal should face *outward* from the source room. The front face should be visible from *outside* the room. The editor gizmo indicates the direction the portal is facing with an arrow, and a different color for each face.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Portals only need to be placed in one of each pair of neighbouring rooms (the *"source room"*). The system will automatically make them two way unless you choose otherwise in the portal node's properties. The portal normal should face *outward* from the source room. The front face should be visible from *outside* the room. The editor gizmo indicates the direction the portal is facing with an arrow, and a different color for each face.
```

.. image:: img/portal_inspector.png

> Like rooms, portals also follow a naming convention which is as follows:
> - Prefix ``Portal_``
> - Optional : You can add a suffix of the room that the portal will lead to ('destination room'). E.g. ``Portal_kitchen``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Like rooms, portals also follow a naming convention which is as follows:

- Prefix ``Portal_``.
- Optional: You can add a suffix of the room that the portal will lead to the "destination" room. For example, ``Portal_kitchen``. This name is not just descriptive; it affects behavior when converting rooms (see below).
```

> The suffix is optional - in many cases the system can automatically detect the nearest room that you intended to link to and do this for you. It is usually only in problem areas you will need to use the suffix.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The suffix is optional. In many cases, the system can automatically detect the nearest room that you intended to link to and do this for you. It is usually only in problem areas you will need to use the suffix.
```

> In rare cases you may end up with two or more portals that you want to give the same name, because they lead into the same destination room. But Godot does not allow duplicate names! The solution to this is the wildcard character `*`. If you place a wildcard at the end of the name, the rest of the characters will be ignored. E.g. ``Portal_Kitchen*1``, ``Portal_Kitchen*2``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In rare cases, you may end up with two or more portals that you want to give the same name, because they lead into the same destination room. However, Godot does not allow duplicate node names at the same level in the scene tree. The solution to this is the wildcard character ``*``. If you place a wildcard at the end of the name, the rest of the characters will be ignored. For example, name your nodes ``Portal_Kitchen*1`` and ``Portal_Kitchen*2``.
```

> All in all there are three ways of specifying which room a portal should link to:
> - Leaving the name suffix blank to use auto-linking
> - A suffix in the name
> - Assigning the ``Linked Room`` in the inspector for a portal node (this is simply a shortcut for setting the name)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All in all, there are three ways of specifying which room a portal should link to:

- Leaving the name suffix blank to use auto-linking.
- Add a suffix to the Portal node's name.
- Assigning the **Linked Room** in the inspector for a Portal node. This is simply a shortcut for setting the name by renaming the node.
```

> .. note:: Portals have some restrictions to work properly. They should be convex, and the polygon points should be in the same plane. The snapping of points to a plane is enforced because portal points are only defined in 2D (with x and y coordinates) - the node transform is used to convert these to world space 3D points. The node transform thus determines the portal orientation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. note:: Portals have some restrictions to work properly. They should be convex, and the polygon points should be in the same plane. The snapping of points to a plane is enforced because portal points are only defined in 2D (with X and Y coordinates). The node transform is used to convert these to world-space 3D points. The node transform thus determines the portal orientation.
```

> Trying it out
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~
> By now you should be able to create a couple of rooms, add some objects (regular ``MeshInstance``\ s) within the rooms, and add a portal between the rooms. Try converting the rooms in the editor, and see if you can now see the objects in neighbouring rooms, through the portal. Great success!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Trying it out
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

By now, you should be able to create a couple of rooms, add some nodes such as MeshInstances within the rooms, and add a portal between the rooms. Try converting the rooms in the editor, and see if you can now see the objects in neighbouring rooms, through the portal.
```
